March 2003

As of version 1.0.6, gretl offers support for LAPACK.  Routines from
LAPACK are used for two new commands, which should be considered
experimental at this point: "system" (equation system, the only sort
available at present being SUR) and "coint2" (Johansen trace test for
cointegration).

These commands are not yet in the PDF manual, but they are documented
in the gretlcli online help file (which is also available in the GUI
program under the menu item "Help/Script commands syntax").  There are
no GUI menu items to invoke the commands yet, but they are available
in gretlcli, via the gretl GUI console, or in a gretl script.

Sample files which illustrate these new commands are supplied.  For
the SUR system see greene14_2.inp, which uses greene13_1.gdt (Grunfeld
investment data) to replicate the SUR example in William Greene's
Econometric Analysis, 5th edition, Chapter 14.  For the Johansen test
see pscoin.inp, which uses hamilton.gdt to replicate the price
levels and exchange rate example in James D. Hamilton's Time Series
Analysis, Chapters 19 and 20.

The new commands depend upon two new plugins, "sur" and "johansen",
which are linked against the LAPACK and BLAS libraries.  These
libraries are supplied with the Windows distribution of gretl in the
form of DLLs.  

If you are building gretl on Linux/unix and wish to have these
commands available, you will need to install LAPACK before configuring
gretl.  RPMs and Debian packages for LAPACK are readily available.  Two
options to gretl's "configure" program are relevant:

* To prevent gretl from linking against LAPACK even if it is available
  on your system, use "--without-lapack". (Then, of course, the new
  commands will not be available).

* If you wish to use LAPACK and it is installed somewhere other than
  in the "/usr" tree, you may need the option "--with-lapack-prefix=",
  e.g. "--with-lapack-prefix=/usr/local".  
